---
layout: post
title:  The Next Great Filter
date:   2020-11-01
updated: 2020-12-25
splash_img_source: /assets/img/posts/great_filter/pexels-neale-lasalle-631477.jpg
---
Given that there are 100’s of billions of Galaxies, with each galaxy containing billions of stars, and most stars possessing a planetary system, we naturally ask the question, where are all the aliens? This is known as the Fermi Paradox. One proposed resolution to this paradox is known as the “Great Filter“. The idea being that there exists great challenges that non living matter and life itself need to pass in order to become a space faring civilization. I believe we are currently undergoing a species level evolutionary selection process, where the evolutionary pressure is our collective inability to understand and deal with nonlinearity. Our natural tendency to think linearly is our next “Great Filter”.

Many people would argue that the current greatest existential threat to humanity is either climate change, nuclear war, pandemics, global economic collapse, rise of artificial intelligence, or asteroid impacts. One thing that they all have in common is that they are all dominated by some non-linear process. The biggest existential threat to humanity is not one specific thing, but rather, our collective inability to understand convexity, concavity, and nonlinearity in general. Our natural tendency to think linearly is the primary reason we have climate change deniers, Covid deniers, and people not understanding the importance of suboptimal masks.

In general non-linearity is a simple concept. Let us take an example: falling from a height of 1 meter vs 10 meters. If you fall from a height of 1 meter 10 times, your chance of injury is pretty much 0. Now if you fall from a height of 10 metres or even 5 meters even just once, your chance of injury(even death) is almost certain. Non-linearity dominates almost every aspect of our lives. We can see it in a highly famous musician releasing a new album, wherein a relatively small amount of work leads to a huge pay-out. Equally similar is a small musician spending large amounts of time for little to no pay. In the case of climate change, a small change in global temperature leads to catastrophic effects such as hurricanes, droughts, wildfires, and floods. A person eating a bat in China leads to millions around the world dead in just a few months. Simply put, a non linear process is such that the input and output are highly disproportionate and do not scale together at the same rate.

Despite the fact that nonlinearity dominates almost every aspect of our lives, we seem to be terrible at internalizing it and truly understanding it. It’s not only uneducated people that have trouble with nonlinearity as you might think, some of our most highly educated and highly respected scientists, leaders, and authority figures have the same issue. This was most evident with the Covid-19 outbreak during January and February of 2020, when our scientists and leaders did not understand exponential growth and acted far too slowly to contain the virus. Had we acted in January or early February and locked down for 4-5 weeks to contain this virus we would not be going through a second wave nor have experienced such a devastating blow to the economy. It was our collective failure in understanding exponential growth well enough that has led to the largest pandemic in over a century. 

There are many more examples of very competent people not understanding nonlinearity. For instance, there are still scientists and leaders that have not taken climate change as a real threat. In fact even climate scientists may be underestimating the speed at which devastation will occur. Most climate forecasting models are statistical and do not take into account the positive feedback loop of a warming earth. The raging wildfires in the US and Australia is an example of a positive feedback loop wherein the planet gets warmer, which leads to more wildfires, and this cycle continues. The record number of hurricanes and record high temperatures that occurred this year also contributed to this positive feedback loop because we expend more energy through A/C usage and damage control, leading to more carbon in the atmosphere. Positive feedback loops are exponential, which are highly nonlinear and difficult to model or understand.

Technology has increasingly made our world more and more dominated by nonlinearity. Technology is anything that increases our leverage, whether it be physical, mental, financial, destructive, or constructive. The extra leverage provided makes things more nonlinear; the input and output are highly disproportionate and do not scale at the same rate. This is both positive and negative. A kid with some coding skills can now become a billionaire by writing a few lines of code, but at the same time we have created weapons that can destroy cities at the push of a button. As we continue innovating and increasing our leverage in more creative ways, we will be faced with newer challenges. 

One way to view this “Great Filter” is from an evolutionary lens at a species level. Our collective inability to understand nonlinearity is this new pressure we face as a species. We cannot separate those that do understand nonlinearity with those that do not. We have become so interconnected, the actions of any single person or country affects all others. It will come down to our collective understanding of nonlinearity that will determine if we can overcome climate change, pandemics, the economic consequences of AI/ML, and any other negative nonlinear processes we might face. 